---
layout: post
title: "What is food to you?"
quote: Examining that crucial underlying reason denting your weight loss progression
image: /assets/images/tiger.jpg
video: false
tags: 
---

In my pursuit of weight loss, I am constantly at battle with my hugest enemy: My perception towards food.

I could have lost a lot of weight and boast a svelte figure in body-hugging tees, but I will always remain that fat kid in my head. 

It all boils down to that fat kid mentality I have towards food, by far the biggest snag in losing and maintaining my weight.

The other obstacle i.e. irregular long hectic hours at work for weeks on end comes very close to this too, but is usually mitigated by a longer gym session on that rare Sunday off. 

Manageable, albeit a compromise nonetheless. You have to do what you can with what little  you have, especially time.
 
In my world, there are two kinds of food i.e. healthy and unhealthy. 

Characteristics:
Foods in the healthy category 
Typically bland and boring. Far from satiating and leaves me hungry for (unhealthy) food. 
Vegetables, fruits, whole grain stuff, yogurt, milk, nuts.
I rarely get by the entire afternoon with a salad and more often than not will resort to snack bars by 5 pm.

Foods in the unhealthy category
Irresistible. Exciting. Leaves me craving for more.
Pizza, waffles, fettucine carbonara, kaya balls, curly fries, cendol, roti canai, bubble milk tea. The list is inexhaustive, being typically Malaysian.

The biggest issue here is not the greasiness or sugar-loaded these foods are. It is my inclination towards viewing these foods as source of comfort and reward that throws me in a perpetual loop of weight loss and gain.

When I work long stressful hours consecutively for weeks or even months, I resort to taking out my frustration and dissatisfaction through these foods. They are my “happy foods”, that innocent little ice cream to pick me up on a dejected afternoon, the iced latte to get through the morning, the heavy lunches due to skipped breakfasts, the even heavier dinners to compensate for my unhappiness.

All innocent when consumed sparsely, they all combine to pack on pounds before I even know it. Or even before the projects at hand are wrapped up.

It is precisely this reward system using food that translates into losing the battle before I even begin.

I can exercise like a cow racing away from the slaughterhouse, gain precious pounds of fat-burning muscle, boost my metabolism rate through consistent meals and physical activity, eat salads on most lunches, do a low carb diet - pull out all stops to getting to my dream body. The truth is, come the cheat weekend, all sense of restraint will break loose on the dining plates.

Heading over to the internet for guidance on managing my relationship with food has not been exactly helpful. See, a lot of articles or videos I came across mostly deal with the following:

1. What sort of exercises best for effective weight loss
2. What sort of food to eat - nutrition, recipes, meal times and portions
3. Why the weight is not coming off despite doing the above
4. How to improve workouts, exercise the right way, etc

From my observation, handling our relationship with food is not as commonly discussed as those matters above. This needs to change, otherwise folks will be less aware of the reality that their diet changes are not going to last long once the the weight loss itch scratches itself out.

Currently, I’m hitting the gym fairly regularly about 4 times a week for at least an hour each session. I’m working with a dedicated trainer, I’m lifting weights, I’m tolerating 20 minutes of cardio on average at high intensity (I detest cardio by the way), I indulge in adequate recovery periods for the body to rest and rebuild itself.

I’m more conscious about what I eat, I’ve reduced the amount of “unhealthy” carb intake such as rice, pasta, pastries. I’ve shunned sweet sugary drinks on most days. 

I won’t give up my caffeine ever - I am better off killing myself if I had to restrain
myself from a warm cuppa in view of my already burgeoning list of rejected foods. I eat salad / sandwiches about 3 times a week followed by healthy dinners on most weekdays. My weekend cheating has been rather docile thus far, if I should say, when compared to the lengths I used to go to during my “happy let-go” period.

(UPDATE: My schedule has been completely flipped and I have been clocking in insane hours at work. I no longer have the luxury of affording 4 sessions at the gym, I have not seen my personal trainer for some time. My diet, while still under control, is nowhere near that described above.)

So it seems like I’m doing most things right. And yes, the “weight” has been coming off in terms of new muscle tone, less jiggly bits, overall increase in strength and alertness. 
However, my progress is constantly threatened by my urge to indulge in ‘exciting’ foods, foods that can wipe out an entire week’s worth of calories lost through blood, sweat and tears in the gym. 

A piece of cake really (pun intended).

You may say that cheat days are crucial for keeping your sanity in check and to provide your body with the fats you have so diligently avoided throughout the week, I do not deny that at all.

The issue comes in when self-control during cheat weekends goes haywire. 
You’re telling me to exercise further restraint on cheat days? When I’ve been munching grass like a goat almost the entire week? 

[to be continued]

-----
Part 1 out of 2
